docs: Integration guide for prometheus (#1706)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/user/integration/prometheus/README.md

# Integrate with Prometheus

| Category     |                                         |
| ------------ | --------------------------------------- |
| Signal types | metrics                                 |
| Backend type | custom local                            |
| OTLP-native  | yes                                     |

Learn how to configure the Telemetry module to ingest metrics in a custom [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) instance deployed with the [`kube-prometheus-stack`](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/kube-prometheus-stack).

## Table of Content

- [Integrate with Prometheus](#integrate-with-prometheus)
  - [Table of Content](#table-of-content)
  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  - [Context](#context)

> 

Reviewer: One section is missing:

```suggestion
- [Procedure](#procedure)
```

If you want to go wild (and give better overview to the reader), consider adding the sub-procedures to the TOC:

```suggestion
- [Procedure](#procedure)
  - [Install the kube-prometheus-stack](#install-the-kube-prometheus-stack)
  - [Verify the kube-prometheus-stack](#verify-the-kube-prometheus-stack)
  - [Activate a MetricPipeline](#activate-a-metricpipeline)
  - [Deploy the Sample Application](#deploy-the-sample-application)
  - [Cleanup](#cleanup)
```

At which point did the user achieve the goal of the procedure? Meaning, a result like "You have successfully integrated Kyma telemetry with Prometheus."  Before or after the cleanup?

Author: I restructured it a bit

## Prerequisites

- Kyma as the target deployment environment.

> - The [Telemetry module](../../README.md) is added. For details, see [Quick Install](https://kyma-project.io/#/02-get-started/01-quick-install). <!-- This link differs for OS and SKR -->

Reviewer: Do you want me to add this doc to Help Portal?

Author: The prometheus integration guide? no, let's focus on SAP scenarios only there

- If you want to use Istio access logs, make sure that the [Istio module](https://kyma-project.io/#/istio/user/README) is added.
<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
- Kubernetes CLI (kubectl) (see [Install the Kubernetes Command Line Tool](https://developers.sap.com/tutorials/cp-kyma-download-cli.html)).
<!-- markdown-link-check-enable -->
- UNIX shell or Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to execute commands.

> [!WARNING]

> - This guide describes a basic setup that you should not use in production. Typically, a production setup needs further configuration, like optimizing the amount of data to be collected and the required resource footprint of the installation. To achieve qualities like [high availability](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/faq/#can-prometheus-be-made-highly-available), [scalability](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/faq/#i-was-told-prometheus-doesnt-scale), or [durable long-term storage](https://prometheus.io/docs/operating/integrations/#remote-endpoints-and-storage), you need a more advanced setup.

Author: done

> - This example uses the latest Grafana version, which is under AGPL-3.0 and might not be free of charge for commercial usage.

Author: done

## Context

> The Telemetry module supports shipping metrics from applications and the Istio service mesh to Prometheus using the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP). Prometheus is a widely used backend for collection and storage of metrics. The `kube-prometheus-stack` is a Helm chart which bundles Prometheus together with Grafana and the Alertmanager, to have an instant and comprehensive monitoring experience. Furthermore, it brings community-driven best practices on kubernetes monitoring including the node-exporter and kube-state-metrics component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Telemetry module supports shipping metrics from applications and the Istio service mesh to Prometheus using the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP). Prometheus is a widely used backend for collection and storage of metrics. The `kube-prometheus-stack` is a Helm chart which bundles Prometheus together with Grafana and the Alertmanager, to have an instant and comprehensive monitoring experience. Furthermore, it brings community-driven best practices on Kubernetes monitoring including the components node-exporter and kube-state-metrics.
```

> As the OpenTelemetry community is not that advanced yet in providing a full-blown Kubernetes monitoring, this guide shows how to combine the two worlds by integrating application and Istio metrics via the telemetry module, and the kubernetes monitoring via the features of the bundle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the OpenTelemetry community is not that advanced yet in providing a full-blown Kubernetes monitoring, this guide shows how to combine the two worlds by integrating application and Istio metrics with the Telemetry module, and the Kubernetes monitoring with the features of the bundle:
```

> Because the OpenTelemetry community is not that advanced yet in providing a full-blown Kubernetes monitoring, this guide shows how to combine the two worlds by integrating application and Istio metrics with the Telemetry module, and the Kubernetes monitoring with the features of the bundle:

Reviewer: Not sure if "solution" is the best word here, but this sentence either needs a noun after "monitoring", or we drop the "a". 

```suggestion
Because the OpenTelemetry community is not that advanced yet in providing a full-blown Kubernetes monitoring solution, this guide shows how to combine the two worlds by integrating application and Istio metrics with the Telemetry module, and the Kubernetes monitoring with the features of the bundle:
```
or
```suggestion
Because the OpenTelemetry community is not that advanced yet in providing full-blown Kubernetes monitoring, this guide shows how to combine the two worlds by integrating application and Istio metrics with the Telemetry module, and the Kubernetes monitoring with the features of the bundle:
```

> In this guide you will first deploy the `kube-prometheus-stack`, then you will configure the telemetry module to start metric ingestion, and then you deploy the sample application to illustrate custom metric consumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you first deploy the `kube-prometheus-stack`. Then, you configure the Telemetry module to start metric ingestion. Finally, you deploy the sample application to illustrate custom metric consumption.
```

![setup](./../assets/prometheus.drawio.svg)

> ## Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Procedure
```

> ## Install the kube-prometheus-stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install the kube-prometheus-stack
```
It's part of the main procedure, right?

> 1. Export your Namespace as a variable. Replace the `{namespace}` placeholder in the following command and run it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Export your namespace as a variable. Replace the `{namespace}` placeholder in the following command and run it:
```

    ```bash
    export K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE="{namespace}"
    ```

> 1. If you haven't created the Namespace yet, now is the time to do so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you haven't created the namespace yet, now is the time to do so:
```
Would it make sense to switch the order of step 1 and 2? First check if you have the namespace and if you don't, create it. Then, export it as variable.

Author: If you have the namespace, you still need the variable as we use the variable in the later commands

Reviewer: Pls confirm: I can perform step 1 even before a namespace exists?
Then how do I know what exactly to enter for the placeholder?

Author: The namespace you want to use (either existing or not) you should put in this env variable. Yes, you can do that at any time, setting just an env variable. And yes, you need to specify a namespace, there is no way around

Reviewer: I see! And this typically happens (or should happen) before the namespace exists?

Author: The commands here are using the namespace name as variable input. Also the namespace creation will need the name. So you define once a variable and use it in all commands, including namespace creation

    ```bash
    kubectl create namespace $K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE
    ```

>    >**Note**: This namespace must have **no** Istio sidecar injection enabled; that is, there must be no `istio-injection` label present on the namespace. The Helm chart applies Kubernetes Jobs which fail when Istio sidecar injection is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >**Note**: This namespace must have **no** Istio sidecar injection enabled; that is, there must be no `istio-injection` label present on the namespace. The Helm chart applies Kubernetes Jobs, which fail when Istio sidecar injection is enabled.
```

Do all Kubernetes Jobs fail when Istio sidecar injection is enabled, or just these specific ones? If it's just specific ones, you need "that" without comma:
 
```suggestion
   >**Note**: This namespace must have **no** Istio sidecar injection enabled; that is, there must be no `istio-injection` label present on the namespace. The Helm chart applies Kubernetes Jobs that fail when Istio sidecar injection is enabled.
```

>    >**Note**: This Namespace must have **no** Istio sidecar injection enabled; that is, there must be no `istio-injection` label present on the Namespace. The Helm chart deploys jobs that will not succeed when Isto sidecar injection is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >**Note**: This namespace must have **no** Istio sidecar injection enabled; that is, there must be no `istio-injection` label present on the namespace. The Helm chart deploys jobs that fail when Isto sidecar injection is enabled.
```

1. Export the Helm release name that you want to use. It can be any name, but be aware that all resources in the cluster will be prefixed with that name. Run the following command:
    ```bash
    export HELM_PROM_RELEASE="prometheus"
    ```

1. Update your Helm installation with the required Helm repository:

    ```bash
    helm repo add prometheus-community https://prometheus-community.github.io/helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

1. Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if it's not present yet. At the end of the command, change the Grafana admin password to some value of your choice.
    ```bash
    helm upgrade --install -n ${K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE} ${HELM_PROM_RELEASE} prometheus-community/kube-prometheus-stack -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/main/docs/user/integration/prometheus/values.yaml --set grafana.adminPassword=myPwd
    ```

> 1. You can use the [values.yaml](./values.yaml) provided with this tutorial, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You can use the [values.yaml](./values.yaml) provided with this guide, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own one.
```
We called it "guide" above, so I'd keep that term.

The provided `values.yaml` covers the following adjustments:

> - Basic Istio setup to secure communication between Prometheus, Grafana and Alertmanager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Basic Istio setup to secure communication between Prometheus, Grafana, and Alertmanager
```

> - Native OTLP receiver enabled for prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Native OTLP receiver enabled for Prometheus
```

- Basic configuration of data persistence with retention
- Basic resource limits for involved components

> ## Verify the kube-prometheus-stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Verify the kube-prometheus-stack
```

> 1. You should see several Pods coming up in the Namespace, especially Prometheus, Grafana and Alertmanager. Assure that all Pods have the "Running" state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If the stack was provided successfully, you see several Pods coming up in the Namespace, especially Prometheus, Grafana, and Alertmanager. Assure that all Pods have the "Running" state.
```

> 2. Browse the Prometheus dashboard and verify that all "Status->Targets" are healthy. The following command exposes the dashboard on `http://localhost:9090`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Browse the Prometheus dashboard and verify that all "Status->Targets" are healthy. To see the dashboard on `http://localhost:9090`, run:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE} port-forward $(kubectl -n ${K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE} get service -l app=kube-prometheus-stack-prometheus -oname) 9090
   ```

> 3. Browse the Grafana dashboard and verify that the dashboards are showing data. The user `admin` is preconfigured in the Helm chart; the password was provided in your `helm install` command. The following command exposes the dashboard on `http://localhost:3000`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Browse the Grafana dashboard and verify that the dashboards are showing data. The user `admin` is preconfigured in the Helm chart; the password was provided in your `helm install` command. To see the dashboard on `http://localhost:3000`, run:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl -n ${K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE} port-forward svc/${HELM_PROM_RELEASE}-grafana 3000:80
   ```

> ## Activate a MetricPipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Activate a MetricPipeline
```

> 1. Apply a MetricPipeline resource having the output configured with the local prometheus URL and having the inputs enabled for collecting Istio metrics and collecting application metrics whose workloads are annotated with prometheus annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Apply a MetricPipeline resource that has the output configured with the local Prometheus URL and has the inputs enabled for collecting Istio metrics and collecting application metrics whose workloads are annotated with Prometheus annotations.
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer: I believe you need 3 blank spaces at the beginning of each line for indentation under the step

Author: fixed

SERVICE=$(kubectl -n ${K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE} get service -l app=kube-prometheus-stack-prometheus -ojsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}')
kubectl apply -n sap-cloud-logging-integration -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: MetricPipeline
metadata:
    name: prometheus
spec:
    input:
        prometheus:
            enabled: true
            namespaces:
                exclude:
                - kyma-system
        istio:
            enabled: true
    output:
        otlp:
            protocol: http
            endpoint:
                value: "http://${SERVICE}.${K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE}:9090/api/v1/otlp"
EOF
```

1. Verify the MetricPipeline health by verifying that all attributes are "true":
    ```sh
    kubectl get metricpipeline prometheus
    ```

1. Port forward to Grafana once more and verify in the "Explore" view if metrics with prefix "istio_" are available.

> 1. Optionally import the Istio Grafana dashboards as described [here](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/integrations/grafana/#option-2-import-from-grafanacom-into-an-existing-deployment) and verify that the dashboards are showing data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Optionally, import the Istio Grafana dashboards (see [Istio: Import from grafana.com into an existing deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/integrations/grafana/#option-2-import-from-grafanacom-into-an-existing-deployment)) and verify that the dashboards are showing data.
```

> ## Deploy the sample application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploy the Sample Application
```

> ## Deploy the Sample Application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploy the Sample Application
```

Author: done

1. Deploy the [sample app](./../sample-app/):

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/main/docs/user/integration/sample-app/deployment/deployment.yaml -n $K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE
    ```

> 1. Go to your Grafana Dashboard as described above and check in the explore view for the metric `cpu_temperature_celsius` which is emmited by the sample app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Go to your Grafana dashboard as described above and check in the **Explore** view for the metric `cpu_temperature_celsius`, which is emitted by the sample app.
```

"as described above" - where?

### Cleanup

1. To remove the installation from the cluster, call Helm:
    ```bash
    helm delete -n ${K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE} ${HELM_PROM_RELEASE}
    ```

1. To remove the MetricPipeline, call kubectl:
    ```bash
    helm delete MetricPipeline prometheus
    ```

> 1. Run the following command to completely remove the example app and all its resources from the cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To remove the example app and all its resources from the cluster, run the following command:
```

    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/main/docs/user/integration/sample-app/deployment/deployment.yaml -n $K8S_PROM_NAMESPACE
    ```

> 1. Verify that the Deployment of the sample-app is healthy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify that the Deployment of the sample app is healthy:
```

    ```sh
    kubectl rollout status deployment sample-app
    ```

## Verify the Setup

> 1. Port forward to Grafana once more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Port forward to Grafana once more.
```

> 1. Check in the **Explore** view for the metric with prefix "istio_", which are collected by the MetricPipeline using the `istio` input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Explore** view, search for the metrics with prefix "istio_", which are collected by the MetricPipeline using the `istio` input.
```

1. Optionally, import the Istio Grafana dashboards (see [Istio: Import from grafana.com into an existing deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/integrations/grafana/#option-2-import-from-grafanacom-into-an-existing-deployment)) and verify that the dashboards are showing data.

> 1. Check in the **Explore** view for the metric `cpu_temperature_celsius`, which is pushed by the sample app to the gateway managed by the MetricPipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Explore** view, search for the metric `cpu_temperature_celsius`, which is pushed by the sample app to the gateway managed by the MetricPipeline.
```
